README.md, before:

# llm.f90 

(formerly llama2.f90)

Hackable large language model inference in pure Fortran. Builds to a ~100k executable that can be run efficiently on a CPU and has zero external dependencies. Between this and sibling project https://github.com/rbitr/ferrite you can create and customize a retrieval augmented (RAG) or other complete language model system.

__See the [ssm](https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90/tree/master/ssm) folder for mamba state space model inference code__

## Interesting branches

https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90/tree/optimize16/purefortran

Current single-core performance of 7.3 tok/s vs 7.4 tok/s for llama.cpp

## Getting started

The base implementation in the `master` branch runs on a single core only. See the roadmap below for more info on what has been done and what is planned.


### Clone the repo and build
```bash
git clone https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90
cd llm.f90
make
```

### Get a model file (supports GGUF format)

This is a 1.1B parameter llama model converted into 32-bit gguf. See https://huggingface.co/Tensoic/Tiny-Llama-openhermes-1.1B-step-715k-1.5T for the model info

```bash
wget https://huggingface.co/SDFASDGA/llm/resolve/main/ggml-model-f32.gguf
```

### Run the model

```bash
$ ./llm -m ggml-model-f32.gguf -t 0.9 -v -n 96 -p "I stopped posting on knitting forums because"
 Embedding dimension:         2048
 Hidden dimension:         5632
 Layers:           22
 Heads:           32
 kv Heads:            4
 Vocabulary Size:        32000
 Sequence Length:         2048
 head size           64
 kv head Size          256
 loaded embedding weights:    65536000
 loaded rms att weights:       45056
 loaded wq weights:    92274688
 loaded wk weights:    11534336
 loaded wv weights:    11534336
 loaded wo weights:    92274688
 loaded ffn norm weights:       45056
 loaded w1 (gate) weights:   253755392
 loaded w2 (down) weights:   253755392
 loaded w3 (up) weights:   253755392
 loaded output norm weights:        2048
 loaded classifier weights:    65536000
 loading tokens
found 32000 tokens
found 32000 scores
 maximum token length           48
 Loaded weights
I stopped posting on knitting forums because I couldn't find the 
knitters I was looking for, and it often seemed that no longer 
interested knitters would post here. Groups like Ravelry and 
Knitters' Yarn Added are important to all of us, and I really thought 
it was time for our own site to be my own place to showcase my work, 
to find people who were interested in knitting, and on and on. 
 Inference time:    22.5280018      seconds
   4.21697426     tokens/second
 Timings
           1   26.6666660    
           2   0.00000000    
           3   0.00000000    
           4   192.000000    
           5   17.3333340 
```

### Options

### Notes

The base version currently hard codes the model parameters. This is trivially changed with some uncommenting that will let you load any llama2 model. For anything much bigger (depending on your computer) the suggested branch is https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/version_0 than implements 16-bit floats and parallelism but has not been optimized. To use this branch you will have to get a .gguf version of the model and then convert it as described in the readme.

Models may load slightly faster if you convert to the "ak" file format (from Andrej Karpathy's llama2.c) and load that instead. 

## Features and Roadmap

If you want to use `llm.f90` for a project and need support, please get in touch. See the `motivation` section below for information about the "philosophy". We want any features added to not add complexity, so for example quantization will be written as a separate program.

- :white_check_mark: Speed: currently matches llama.cpp for single thread 32-bit operation (tested on a single intel machine so ymmv) __Update: try a competitive 16-bit implementation at `optimize16/purefortran` (not actually pure Fortran, it calls a C SIMD routine__
- :construction: Parallelism: see https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/version_0 (also with 16-bit quantization)
- :construction: Quantization: see https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/f16_convert and https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/four_bit_dev for 16-bit and 4-bit respectively
- :soon: Support for other models
- :soon: Test on other architectures machines (Apple, other ARM, etc). Please open issues for any feedback.
- :soon: ... 

Note that :construction: means features that have a "legacy" implementation that works but uses older model file formats and may have other breaking changes. The plan is to roll these into the current `master` branch while preserving speed optimizations and direct loading of gguf files.

## Motivation

See [here](http://marble.onl/posts/why_host_your_own_llm.html) for why language models *inferenece* should be self-hosted for most non-trivial uses. A big reason for this is that LLMs are still a new and rapidly evolving technology and that being able to "hack" the implementation is important to make the best use of them. A corollary to being able to hack the implementation is being able to easily understand and modify the code. The requirements for a hackable model are at odds with the requirements for a framework that has lots of composable parts and works across many platforms. There is a niche for, is something that's dead simple, where the only abstraction is linear algebra and matrix operations, but is also fast enough to run inference at competitive speeds on normal hardware. 

[Pytorch](https://pytorch.org/) is a full featured framework but is highly abstracted and not optimized for CPU inference. [Llama.cpp / ggml](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) is well optimized for a wide range of hardware and has a simpler project structure compared to pytorch that increases hackability. However as of writing, ggml.c is 20k lines and llama.cpp is 7k. The hand optimization across many platforms plus big range of options (all of which make it a good, full featured software project) make it heavy to work with. [Llama2.c](https://github.com/karpathy/llama2.c) (the names are confusing and I may change the name of this project) is very hackable (although less than when it started) and simple to understand. It is not optimized; while in principle it could be, it will still be a C program that requires memory management and manual vector / matrix operations.

| | Pytorch | llama.cpp | llama2.c | llm.f90 |
|-|---------|-----------|----------|------------|
|Good abstraction| x | x | | |
|Broad hardware support| x | x | | |
|Simple & Hackable| | | x | x |
|Fast| | x | | x |
|Memory and linalg| x | | | x |


The plan is to retain the hackability of llama2.c, but with the speed of Llama.cpp (currently we achieve comparable speeds on CPU) and the matrix and memory support of Fortran. So far optimization has not significantly diminished the readability or understandability of the code. The goal is not a framework that can be called from other programs, but example source code that can be modified directly for custom use. The hope is that such modifications will be as easy or easier than working with a high level framework. At the same time, we provide the capability of running an LLM from the command line. 

Additional options, such as quantization (under development), are preferred to be added as in dedicated programs instead of as branches of one main program. Likewise if we decide to support another model. In this way (hopefully) we keep everything simple and easy to use and hack elsewhere.

Commit message:

Added reference to phi-2 model

README.md, after:

# llm.f90 

(formerly llama2.f90)

Hackable large language model inference in pure Fortran. Builds to a ~100k executable that can be run efficiently on a CPU and has zero external dependencies. Between this and sibling project https://github.com/rbitr/ferrite you can create and customize a retrieval augmented (RAG) or other complete language model system.

__See the [ssm](https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90/tree/master/ssm) folder for mamba state space model inference code__

## Interesting branches

https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90/tree/optimize16/purefortran

Current single-core performance of 7.3 tok/s vs 7.4 tok/s for llama.cpp

https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90/tree/dev/phi2/phi2

An implementation of the phi-2 model from Microsoft.

## Getting started

The base implementation in the `master` branch runs on a single core only. See the roadmap below for more info on what has been done and what is planned.


### Clone the repo and build
```bash
git clone https://github.com/rbitr/llm.f90
cd llm.f90
make
```

### Get a model file (supports GGUF format)

This is a 1.1B parameter llama model converted into 32-bit gguf. See https://huggingface.co/Tensoic/Tiny-Llama-openhermes-1.1B-step-715k-1.5T for the model info

```bash
wget https://huggingface.co/SDFASDGA/llm/resolve/main/ggml-model-f32.gguf
```

### Run the model

```bash
$ ./llm -m ggml-model-f32.gguf -t 0.9 -v -n 96 -p "I stopped posting on knitting forums because"
 Embedding dimension:         2048
 Hidden dimension:         5632
 Layers:           22
 Heads:           32
 kv Heads:            4
 Vocabulary Size:        32000
 Sequence Length:         2048
 head size           64
 kv head Size          256
 loaded embedding weights:    65536000
 loaded rms att weights:       45056
 loaded wq weights:    92274688
 loaded wk weights:    11534336
 loaded wv weights:    11534336
 loaded wo weights:    92274688
 loaded ffn norm weights:       45056
 loaded w1 (gate) weights:   253755392
 loaded w2 (down) weights:   253755392
 loaded w3 (up) weights:   253755392
 loaded output norm weights:        2048
 loaded classifier weights:    65536000
 loading tokens
found 32000 tokens
found 32000 scores
 maximum token length           48
 Loaded weights
I stopped posting on knitting forums because I couldn't find the 
knitters I was looking for, and it often seemed that no longer 
interested knitters would post here. Groups like Ravelry and 
Knitters' Yarn Added are important to all of us, and I really thought 
it was time for our own site to be my own place to showcase my work, 
to find people who were interested in knitting, and on and on. 
 Inference time:    22.5280018      seconds
   4.21697426     tokens/second
 Timings
           1   26.6666660    
           2   0.00000000    
           3   0.00000000    
           4   192.000000    
           5   17.3333340 
```

### Options

### Notes

The base version currently hard codes the model parameters. This is trivially changed with some uncommenting that will let you load any llama2 model. For anything much bigger (depending on your computer) the suggested branch is https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/version_0 than implements 16-bit floats and parallelism but has not been optimized. To use this branch you will have to get a .gguf version of the model and then convert it as described in the readme.

Models may load slightly faster if you convert to the "ak" file format (from Andrej Karpathy's llama2.c) and load that instead. 

## Features and Roadmap

If you want to use `llm.f90` for a project and need support, please get in touch. See the `motivation` section below for information about the "philosophy". We want any features added to not add complexity, so for example quantization will be written as a separate program.

- :white_check_mark: Speed: currently matches llama.cpp for single thread 32-bit operation (tested on a single intel machine so ymmv) __Update: try a competitive 16-bit implementation at `optimize16/purefortran` (not actually pure Fortran, it calls a C SIMD routine__
- :construction: Parallelism: see https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/version_0 (also with 16-bit quantization)
- :construction: Quantization: see https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/f16_convert and https://github.com/rbitr/llama2.f90/tree/four_bit_dev for 16-bit and 4-bit respectively
- :soon: Support for other models
- :soon: Test on other architectures machines (Apple, other ARM, etc). Please open issues for any feedback.
- :soon: ... 

Note that :construction: means features that have a "legacy" implementation that works but uses older model file formats and may have other breaking changes. The plan is to roll these into the current `master` branch while preserving speed optimizations and direct loading of gguf files.

## Motivation

See [here](http://marble.onl/posts/why_host_your_own_llm.html) for why language models *inferenece* should be self-hosted for most non-trivial uses. A big reason for this is that LLMs are still a new and rapidly evolving technology and that being able to "hack" the implementation is important to make the best use of them. A corollary to being able to hack the implementation is being able to easily understand and modify the code. The requirements for a hackable model are at odds with the requirements for a framework that has lots of composable parts and works across many platforms. There is a niche for, is something that's dead simple, where the only abstraction is linear algebra and matrix operations, but is also fast enough to run inference at competitive speeds on normal hardware. 

[Pytorch](https://pytorch.org/) is a full featured framework but is highly abstracted and not optimized for CPU inference. [Llama.cpp / ggml](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) is well optimized for a wide range of hardware and has a simpler project structure compared to pytorch that increases hackability. However as of writing, ggml.c is 20k lines and llama.cpp is 7k. The hand optimization across many platforms plus big range of options (all of which make it a good, full featured software project) make it heavy to work with. [Llama2.c](https://github.com/karpathy/llama2.c) (the names are confusing and I may change the name of this project) is very hackable (although less than when it started) and simple to understand. It is not optimized; while in principle it could be, it will still be a C program that requires memory management and manual vector / matrix operations.

| | Pytorch | llama.cpp | llama2.c | llm.f90 |
|-|---------|-----------|----------|------------|
|Good abstraction| x | x | | |
|Broad hardware support| x | x | | |
|Simple & Hackable| | | x | x |
|Fast| | x | | x |
|Memory and linalg| x | | | x |


The plan is to retain the hackability of llama2.c, but with the speed of Llama.cpp (currently we achieve comparable speeds on CPU) and the matrix and memory support of Fortran. So far optimization has not significantly diminished the readability or understandability of the code. The goal is not a framework that can be called from other programs, but example source code that can be modified directly for custom use. The hope is that such modifications will be as easy or easier than working with a high level framework. At the same time, we provide the capability of running an LLM from the command line. 

Additional options, such as quantization (under development), are preferred to be added as in dedicated programs instead of as branches of one main program. Likewise if we decide to support another model. In this way (hopefully) we keep everything simple and easy to use and hack elsewhere.
